Create rule S6561: Do not use DateTime.Now for benchmarking or timing operations (#1711)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6561/csharp/rule.adoc

== Why is this an issue?

> There are various reasons why developers may call multiple times DateTime.Now, DateTimeOffset.Now, 
> DateTime.UtcNow or DateTimeOffset.UtcNow inside the same block:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are various reasons why developers may call multiple times `DateTime.Now`, `DateTimeOffset.Now`, 
`DateTime.UtcNow` or` DateTimeOffset.UtcNow` inside the same block:
```

> 1) The purpose may be simply to store the results, perhaps even expecting the value of the calls to be or not to be the same. 
> However, these properties change their value every time they are called (depending on the system clock resolution), and, calling them repeatedly can be an expensive operation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1) To use the property value, maybe expecting it to be or not to be the same for each call. 
However, these properties change their value every time they are called (depending on the system clock resolution), and, calling them repeatedly can be an expensive operation. 
```

[source,csharp]
----
account1.updatedAt = DateTime.UtcNow; // First call, might be N ticks
account2.updatedAt = DateTime.UtcNow; // Second call, this one could be N + 1 ticks, but also N.
Console.WriteLine($"The accounts have been updated at {DateTime.UtcNow}"); // Third call, this can also be N, N + 1 or N + 2 ticks
----

> 2) The purpose may be to time how long something takes.
> However, using repeated calls to DateTime.Now or DateTime.UtcNow to measure elapsed time is not recommended because it's dependent on the system clock, which may have low resolution on older systems (as low as 15 milliseconds). Moreover, DateTime.Now and DateTimeOffset.Now are subject to Daylight Savings Time (DST), which can cause issues if a DST transition occurs during the benchmark session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2) To measure the elapsed time between actions.
However, using repeated calls to the `DateTime` and `DateTimeOffSet` properties to get the current instant, for the purpose of measuring elapsed time is not recommended because it's dependent on the system clock, which may have low resolution on older systems (as low as 15 milliseconds). Moreover, `DateTime.Now` and `DateTimeOffset.Now` are subject to Daylight Savings Time (DST), which can cause issues if a DST transition occurs during the benchmark session.
```

> 2) The purpose may be to time how long something takes.
> However, using repeated calls to DateTime.Now or DateTime.UtcNow to measure elapsed time is not recommended because it's dependent on the system clock, which may have low resolution on older systems (as low as 15 milliseconds). Moreover, DateTime.Now and DateTimeOffset.Now are subject to Daylight Savings Time (DST), which can cause issues if a DST transition occurs during the benchmark session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion Daylight Savings Time (DST), which can cause issues if a DST transition occurs during the benchmark session.
```

I think you can add an example here maybe? Like start measuring time 1 min before daylight change and finishing after - and getting a crazy result.

Reviewer: resolving this as I left a comment with an example below.

[source,csharp]
----
var start = DateTime.Now; // First call
MethodToBeBenchmarked();

var elapsed = (int)(DateTime.Now - start).TotalMilliseconds; // Second call
----

== How to fix it

> 1) To avoid these issues and improve the performance of the application, it's recommended to declare a local variable to store a single DateTime or DateTimeOffset value and use it throughout the code block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1) To avoid these issues and improve the performance, it's recommended to declare a local variable to store a single `DateTime` or `DateTimeOffset` value and use it throughout the code block.
```

> 2) Instead of DateTime or DateTimeOffset, it's recommended to use *Stopwatch*, which automatically checks for the existence of high-precision timers, it’s lightweight and computationally faster, and it’s not affected by DST.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2) Instead of `DateTime` or `DateTimeOffset`, it's recommended to use `Stopwatch`, which automatically checks for the existence of high-precision timers. The `Stopwatch` class is lightweight and computationally faster, and it's not affected by DST.
```

----

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
if ((DateTime.UtcNow - latest).TotalMillisecond > 100) // Noncompliant
{
    // Do stuff
    latest = DateTime.UtcNow; // Secondary
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
var utcNow = DateTime.UtcNow;
if ((utcNow - latest).TotalMillisecond > 100) // Compliant
{
    // Do stuff
    latest = utcNow; // Secondary
}
----

or

[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
var stopWatch = Stopwatch.StartNew();

if (stopWatch.ElapsedMilliseconds > 100) // Compliant
{
    // Do stuff
    stopWatch.Restart();
}
----

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
var start = DateTime.Now; // Noncompliant
MethodToBeBenchmarked();

Console.WriteLine("{0} ms",(int)(DateTime.Now - start).TotalMilliseconds); // Secondary
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,csharp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
var stopWatch = Stopwatch.StartNew(); // Compliant
MethodToBeBenchmarked();
stopWatch.Stop();

Console.WriteLine("{0} ms", stopWatch.ElapsedMilliseconds);
----

== Resources

=== Documentation

> * https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.datetime?view=net-7.0#datetime-resolution
> * https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.diagnostics.stopwatch?view=net-7.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.datetime?datetime-resolution
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.diagnostics.stopwatch
```

== Why is this an issue?

There are various reasons why developers may call multiple times `DateTime.Now`, `DateTimeOffset.Now`, `DateTime.UtcNow` or `DateTimeOffset.UtcNow` inside the same block:

> 1) To use the property value, maybe expecting it to be or not to be the same for each call. 

Reviewer 2: I don`t really understand this sentence. _To be or not to be the same_. I mean yes, you can only expect those two scenarios there is no third option.

Reviewer 2: My question here is, from what do we assume that users have any expectations? They just say hey give me the date time of Now. Whatever it is, changed or not...

Reviewer 3: It was just an FYI. We are not assuming them to have expectations, that would not be the case for the majority of cases, I tried expressing that using the `maybe`:

> maybe expecting it to be or not to be the same for each call

Apparently, I wasn't able to convey the message properly, I'll try to reformulate this better.

Reviewer: I understand @cristian-ambrosini-sonarsource  what you mean - but I'm also not sure that we add something with this sentence apart from making the information more complicated.
IMO simply saying that this property has not a stable value every time you call it should be enough.

> 1) To use the property value, maybe expecting it to be or not to be the same for each call. 

Reviewer 2: If there is only 1 reason I would remove the 1)
```suggestion
To use the property value, maybe expecting it to be or not to be the same for each call. 
```

Reviewer: I agree - second point is another rule by itself.

> However, these properties change their value every time they are called (depending on the system clock resolution), and, calling them repeatedly can be an expensive operation. 

Reviewer 2: I think it is debatable if a DateTime.UTCNow is an expensive operation or not.
In all honesty, I would drop the performance-related part of the rule. And would only raise issues if DateTime.Now is used multiple times in the same method. Because of the DST change problem, you mention later.
Why not the other 3, well the other 3 properties don't suffer with DST change.

Reviewer 3: Please take a look at [this small snippet](https://sharplab.io/#v2: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), maybe run it locally playing around with the variables, IMO 2 DateTime.UTC now calls are much more expensive than reassigning a variable once.

I'm not sure about dropping the performance-related part, given the results above, do you still think it needs to be dropped? If so, can you elaborate a bit more why?

> However, these properties change their value every time they are called (depending on the system clock resolution), and, calling them repeatedly can be an expensive operation. 

Reviewer 3: I think it's subjective, I'll keep it this way, it will also be simpler with the shared .adoc files between vb and cs. Let me know if you strongly believe that it should be changed and we can discuss it further 👍

> However, these properties change their value every time they are called (depending on the system clock resolution), and, calling them repeatedly can be an expensive operation. 

Reviewer: Not strong on that - resolving!
